Mr. Chairman, distinguished platform associates, fellow Americans: Three years ago the Supreme Court of this
nation rendered in simple, eloquent, and unequivocal language a decision which will long be stenciled on the mental
sheets of succeeding generations. For all men of goodwill, this May seventeenth decision came as a joyous daybreak
to end the long night of human captivity. It came as a great beacon light of hope to millions of disinherited people
throughout the world who had dared only to dream of freedom.
Unfortunately, this noble and sublime decision has not gone without opposition. This opposition has often risen to
ominous proportions. Many states have risen up in open defiance. The legislative halls of the South ring loud with
such words as "interposition" and "nullification."
But even more, all types of conniving methods are still being used to prevent Negroes from becoming registered
voters. The denial of this sacred right is a tragic betrayal of the highest mandates of our democratic tradition. And so
our most urgent request to the president of the United States and every member of Congress is to give us the right to
vote. (Yes)
Give us the ballot, and we will no longer have to worry the federal government about our basic rights.
Give us the ballot (Yes) and we will no longer plead to the federal government for passage of an anti-lynching law;
we will by the power of our vote write the law on the statute books of the South (All right) and bring an end to the
dastardly acts of the hooded perpetrators of violence.
Give us the ballot (Give us the ballot), and we will transform the salient misdeeds of bloodthirsty mobs (Yeah) into the
calculated good deeds of orderly citizens.
Give us the ballot (Give us the ballot), and we will fill our legislative halls with men of goodwill (All right now) and send
to the sacred halls of Congress men who will not sign a "Southern Manifesto" because of their devotion to the
manifesto of justice. (Tell ’em about it)
Give us the ballot (Yeah), and we will place judges on the benches of the south who will do justly and love mercy
(Yeah), and we will place at the head of the southern states governors who have felt not only the tang of the human,
but the glow of the Divine.
Give us the ballot (Yes), and we will quietly and nonviolently, without rancor or bitterness, implement the Supreme
Court's decision of May seventeenth, 1954. (That's right)
In this juncture of our nation's history, there is an urgent need for dedicated and courageous leadership. If we are to
solve the problems ahead and make racial justice a reality, this leadership must be fourfold.
First, there is need for strong, aggressive leadership from the federal government. So far, only the judicial branch of
the government has evinced this quality of leadership. If the executive and legislative branches of the government
were as concerned about the protection of our citizenship rights as the federal courts have been, then the transition
from a segregated to an integrated society would be infinitely smoother. But we so often look to Washington in vain for this concern. In the midst of the tragic breakdown of law and order, the executive branch of the government is all
too silent and apathetic. In the midst of the desperate need for civil rights legislation, the legislative branch of the
government is all too stagnant and hypocritical.
This dearth of positive leadership from the federal government is not confined to one particular political party. Both
political parties have betrayed the cause of justice. (Oh yes) The Democrats have betrayed it by capitulating to the
prejudices and undemocratic practices of the southern Dixiecrats. The Republicans have betrayed it by capitulating
to the blatant hypocrisy of right wing, reactionary northerners. These men so often have a high blood pressure of
words and an anemia of deeds. [laughter]
In the midst of these prevailing conditions, we come to Washington today pleading with the president and members
of Congress to provide a strong, moral, and courageous leadership for a situation that cannot permanently be
evaded. We come humbly to say to the men in the forefront of our government that the civil rights issue is not an
Ephemeral, evanescent domestic issue that can be kicked about by reactionary guardians of the status quo; it is
rather an eternal moral issue which may well determine the destiny of our nation (Yes) in the ideological struggle with
communism. The hour is late. The clock of destiny is ticking out. We must act now, before it is too late.
A second area in which there is need for strong leadership is from the white northern liberals. There is a dire need
today for a liberalism which is truly liberal. What we are witnessing today in so many northern communities is a sort
of quasi-liberalism which is based on the principle of looking sympathetically at all sides. It is a liberalism so bent on
seeing all sides, that it fails to become committed to either side. It is a liberalism that is so objectively analytical that it
is not subjectively committed. It is a liberalism which is neither hot nor cold, but lukewarm. (All right) We call for a
liberalism from the North which will be thoroughly committed to the ideal of racial justice and will not be deterred by
the propaganda and subtle words of those who say: "Slow up for a while; you're pushing too fast."
A third source that we must look to for strong leadership is from the moderates of the white South. It is unfortunate
that at this time the leadership of the white South stems from the close-minded reactionaries. These persons gain
prominence and power by the dissemination of false ideas and by deliberately appealing to the deepest hate
responses within the human mind. It is my firm belief that this close-minded, reactionary, recalcitrant group
constitutes a numerical minority. There are in the white South more open-minded moderates than appears on the
surface. These persons are silent today because of fear of social, political, and economic reprisals. God grant that
the white moderates of the South will rise up courageously, without fear, and take up the leadership in this tense
period of transition.
I cannot close without stressing the urgent need for strong, courageous and intelligent leadership from the Negro
community. We need a leadership that is calm and yet positive. This is no day for the rabble-rouser, whether he be
Negro or white. (All right) We must realize that we are grappling with the most weighty social problem of this nation,
and in grappling with such a complex problem there is no place for misguided emotionalism. (All right, That’s right)
We must work passionately and unrelentingly for the goal of freedom, but we must be sure that our hands are clean
in the struggle. We must never struggle with falsehood, hate, or malice. We must never become bitter. I know how
we feel sometime. There is the danger that those of us who have been forced so long to stand amid the tragic
midnight of oppression—those of us who have been trampled over, those of us who have been kicked about—there
is the danger that we will become bitter. But if we will become bitter and indulge in hate campaigns, the new order
which is emerging will be nothing but a duplication of the old order. (Yeah, That's all right)
We must meet hate with love. We must meet physical force with soul force. (Yeah) There is still a voice crying out
through the vista of time, saying: "Love your enemies (Yeah), bless them that curse you (Yes), pray for them that
despitefully use you." (That's right. All right) Then, and only then, can you matriculate into the university of eternal life.
That same voice cries out in terms lifted to cosmic proportions: "He who lives by the sword will perish by the sword." (Yes, Lord) And history is replete with the bleached bones of nations (Yeah) that failed to follow this command. (All
right) We must follow nonviolence and love. (Yes, Lord)
Now, I’m not talking about a sentimental, shallow kind of love. (Go ahead) I’m not talking about eros, which is a sort
of aesthetic, romantic love. I’m not even talking about philia, which is a sort of intimate affection between personal
friends. But I'm talking about agape. (Yes sir) I'm talking about the love of God in the hearts of men. (Yes) I’m talking
about a type of love which will cause you to love the person who does the evil deed while hating the deed that the
person does. (Go ahead) We've got to love. (Oh yes)
There is another warning signal. We talk a great deal about our rights, and rightly so. We proudly proclaim that threefourths of the peoples of the world are colored. We have the privilege of noticing in our generation the great drama of
freedom and independence as it unfolds in Asia and Africa. All of these things are in line with the unfolding work of
Providence. But we must be sure that we accept them in the right spirit. We must not seek to use our emerging
freedom and our growing power to do the same thing to the white minority that has been done to us for so many
centuries. (Yes) Our aim must never be to defeat or humiliate the white man. We must not become victimized with a
philosophy of black supremacy. God is not interested merely in freeing black men and brown men and yellow men,
but God is interested in freeing the whole human race. (Yes, All right) We must work with determination to create a
society (Yes), not where black men are superior and other men are inferior and vice versa, but a society in which all
men will live together as brothers (Yes) and respect the dignity and worth of human personality. (Yes)
We must also avoid the temptation of being victimized with a psychology of victors. We have won marvelous
victories. Through the work of the NAACP, we have been able to do some of the most amazing things of this
generation. And I come this afternoon with nothing but praise for this great organization, the work that it has already
done and the work that it will do in the future. And although they're outlawed in Alabama and other states, the fact still
remains that this organization has done more to achieve civil rights for Negroes than any other organization we can
point to. (Yeah, amen) Certainly, this is fine.
But we must not, however, remain satisfied with a court victory over our white brothers. We must respond to every
decision with an understanding of those who have opposed us and with an appreciation of the difficult adjustments
that the court orders pose for them. We must act in such a way as to make possible a coming together of white
people and colored people on the basis of a real harmony of interest and understanding. We must seek an
integration based on mutual respect.
I conclude by saying that each of us must keep faith in the future. Let us not despair. Let us realize that as we
struggle for justice and freedom, we have cosmic companionship. This is the long faith of the Hebraic-Christian
tradition: that God is not some Aristotelian Unmoved Mover who merely contemplates upon himself. He is not merely
a self-knowing God, but an other-loving God (Yeah) forever working through history for the establishment of His
kingdom.
And those of us who call the name of Jesus Christ find something of an event in our Christian faith that tells us this.
There is something in our faith that says to us, "Never despair; never give up; never feel that the cause of
righteousness and justice is doomed." There is something in our Christian faith, at the center of it, which says to us
that Good Friday may occupy the throne for a day, but ultimately it must give way to the triumphant beat of the drums
of Easter. (That's right) There is something in our faith that says evil may so shape events, that Caesar will occupy
the palace and Christ the cross (That's right), but one day that same Christ will rise up and split history into a.d. and
b.c. (Yes), so that even the life of Caesar must be dated by his name. (Yes)
There is something in this universe (Yes, Yes) which justifies Carlyle in saying: "No lie can live forever." (All right)
There is something in this universe which justifies William Cullen Bryant in saying: "Truth crushed to earth will rise again." (Yes. All right) There is something in this universe (Watch yourself) which justifies James Russell Lowell in
saying:
Truth forever on the scaffold,
Wrong forever on the throne. (Oh yeah)
Yet that scaffold sways the future,
And behind the dim unknown
Stands God (All right), within the shadow,
Keeping watch above His own. (Yeah, yes)
Go out with that faith today. (All right, Yes) Go back to your homes in the Southland to that faith, with that faith today.
Go back to Philadelphia, to New York, to Detroit and Chicago with that faith today (That's right): that the universe is
on our side in the struggle. (Sure is, Yes) Stand up for justice. (Yes)
Sometimes it gets hard, but it is always difficult to get out of Egypt, for the Red Sea always stands before you with
discouraging dimensions. (Yes) And even after you've crossed the Red Sea, you have to move through a wilderness
with prodigious hilltops of evil (Yes) and gigantic mountains of opposition. (Yes) But I say to you this afternoon: Keep
moving. (Go on ahead) Let nothing slow you up. (Go on ahead) Move on with dignity and honor and respectability.
(Yes)
I realize that it will cause restless nights sometimes. It might cause losing a job; it will cause suffering and sacrifice.
(That's right) It might even cause physical death for some. But if physical death is the price that some must pay (Yes
sir) to free their children from a permanent life of psychological death (Yes, sir), then nothing can be more Christian.
(Yes sir) Keep going today. (Yes sir) Keep moving amid every obstacle. (Yes sir) Keep moving amid every mountain
of opposition. (Yes, sir, Yeah) If you will do that with dignity (Say it), when the history books are written in the future,
the historians will have to look back and say, "There lived a great people. (Yes sir, Yes) A people with ‘fleecy locks
and black complexion (Yes),’ but a people who injected new meaning into the veins of civilization; a people which
stood up with dignity and honor and saved Western civilization in her darkest hour (Yes); a people that gave new
integrity and a new dimension of love to our civilization." (Yeah, Look out) When that happens, "the morning stars will
sing together, (Yes, sir) and the sons of God will shout for joy." (Yes sir, All right) [applause] (Yes, That’s wonderful,
All right)



I am happy to join with you today in what will go down in history as the greatest demonstration for freedom in the
history of our nation.
Five score years ago, a great American, in whose symbolic shadow we stand today, signed the Emancipation
Proclamation. This momentous decree came as a great beacon light of hope to millions of Negro slaves who had
been seared in the flames of withering injustice. It came as a joyous daybreak to end the long night of their captivity.
But one hundred years later, the Negro still is not free. One hundred years later, the life of the Negro is still sadly
crippled by the manacles of segregation and the chains of discrimination. One hundred years later, the Negro lives
on a lonely island of poverty in the midst of a vast ocean of material prosperity. One hundred years later, the Negro is
still languished in the corners of American society and finds himself an exile in his own land. And so we've come here
today to dramatize a shameful condition.
In a sense we've come to our nation's capital to cash a check. When the architects of our republic wrote the
magnificent words of the Constitution and the Declaration of Independence, they were signing a promissory note to
which every American was to fall heir. This note was a promise that all men, yes, black men as well as white men,
would be guaranteed the "unalienable Rights" of "Life, Liberty and the pursuit of Happiness." It is obvious today that
America has defaulted on this promissory note, insofar as her citizens of color are concerned. Instead of honoring
this sacred obligation, America has given the Negro people a bad check, a check which has come back marked
"insufficient funds."
But we refuse to believe that the bank of justice is bankrupt. We refuse to believe that there are insufficient funds in
the great vaults of opportunity of this nation. And so, we've come to cash this check, a check that will give us upon
demand the riches of freedom and the security of justice.
We have also come to this hallowed spot to remind America of the fierce urgency of Now. This is no time to engage
in the luxury of cooling off or to take the tranquilizing drug of gradualism. Now is the time to make real the promises
of democracy. Now is the time to rise from the dark and desolate valley of segregation to the sunlit path of racial
justice. Now is the time to lift our nation from the quicksands of racial injustice to the solid rock of brotherhood. Now is
the time to make justice a reality for all of God's children.
It would be fatal for the nation to overlook the urgency of the moment. This sweltering summer of the Negro's
legitimate discontent will not pass until there is an invigorating autumn of freedom and equality. Nineteen sixty-three
is not an end, but a beginning. And those who hope that the Negro needed to blow off steam and will now be content
will have a rude awakening if the nation returns to business as usual. And there will be neither rest nor tranquility in
America until the Negro is granted his citizenship rights. The whirlwinds of revolt will continue to shake the
foundations of our nation until the bright day of justice emerges.
But there is something that I must say to my people, who stand on the warm threshold which leads into the palace of
justice: In the process of gaining our rightful place, we must not be guilty of wrongful deeds. Let us not seek to satisfy
our thirst for freedom by drinking from the cup of bitterness and hatred. We must forever conduct our struggle on the
high plane of dignity and discipline. We must not allow our creative protest to degenerate into physical violence.
Again and again, we must rise to the majestic heights of meeting physical force with soul force.The marvelous new militancy which has engulfed the Negro community must not lead us to a distrust of all white
people, for many of our white brothers, as evidenced by their presence here today, have come to realize that their
destiny is tied up with our destiny. And they have come to realize that their freedom is inextricably bound to our
freedom.
We cannot walk alone.
And as we walk, we must make the pledge that we shall always march ahead.
We cannot turn back.
There are those who are asking the devotees of civil rights, "When will you be satisfied?" We can never be satisfied
as long as the Negro is the victim of the unspeakable horrors of police brutality. We can never be satisfied as long as
our bodies, heavy with the fatigue of travel, cannot gain lodging in the motels of the highways and the hotels of the
cities. We cannot be satisfied as long as the negro's basic mobility is from a smaller ghetto to a larger one. We can
never be satisfied as long as our children are stripped of their self-hood and robbed of their dignity by signs stating:
"For Whites Only." We cannot be satisfied as long as a Negro in Mississippi cannot vote and a Negro in New York
believes he has nothing for which to vote. No, no, we are not satisfied, and we will not be satisfied until "justice rolls
down like waters, and righteousness like a mighty stream."¹
I am not unmindful that some of you have come here out of great trials and tribulations. Some of you have come
fresh from narrow jail cells. And some of you have come from areas where your quest -- quest for freedom left you
battered by the storms of persecution and staggered by the winds of police brutality. You have been the veterans of
creative suffering. Continue to work with the faith that unearned suffering is redemptive. Go back to Mississippi, go
back to Alabama, go back to South Carolina, go back to Georgia, go back to Louisiana, go back to the slums and
ghettos of our northern cities, knowing that somehow this situation can and will be changed.
Let us not wallow in the valley of despair, I say to you today, my friends.
And so even though we face the difficulties of today and tomorrow, I still have a dream. It is a dream deeply rooted in
the American dream.
I have a dream that one day this nation will rise up and live out the true meaning of its creed: "We hold these truths to
be self-evident, that all men are created equal."
I have a dream that one day on the red hills of Georgia, the sons of former slaves and the sons of former slave
owners will be able to sit down together at the table of brotherhood.
I have a dream that one day even the state of Mississippi, a state sweltering with the heat of injustice, sweltering with
the heat of oppression, will be transformed into an oasis of freedom and justice.
I have a dream that my four little children will one day live in a nation where they will not be judged by the color of
their skin but by the content of their character.
I have a dream today!
I have a dream that one day, down in Alabama, with its vicious racists, with its governor having his lips dripping with
the words of "interposition" and "nullification" -- one day right there in Alabama little black boys and black girls will be
able to join hands with little white boys and white girls as sisters and brothers. I have a dream today!
I have a dream that one day every valley shall be exalted, and every hill and mountain shall be made low, the rough
places will be made plain, and the crooked places will be made straight; "and the glory of the Lord shall be revealed
and all flesh shall see it together."2
This is our hope, and this is the faith that I go back to the South with.
With this faith, we will be able to hew out of the mountain of despair a stone of hope. With this faith, we will be able to
transform the jangling discords of our nation into a beautiful symphony of brotherhood. With this faith, we will be able
to work together, to pray together, to struggle together, to go to jail together, to stand up for freedom together,
knowing that we will be free one day.
And this will be the day -- this will be the day when all of God's children will be able to sing with new meaning:
My country 'tis of thee, sweet land of liberty, of thee I sing.
Land where my fathers died, land of the Pilgrim's pride,
From every mountainside, let freedom ring!
And if America is to be a great nation, this must become true.
And so let freedom ring from the prodigious hilltops of New Hampshire.
Let freedom ring from the mighty mountains of New York.
Let freedom ring from the heightening Alleghenies of Pennsylvania.
Let freedom ring from the snow-capped Rockies of Colorado.
Let freedom ring from the curvaceous slopes of California.
But not only that:
Let freedom ring from Stone Mountain of Georgia.
Let freedom ring from Lookout Mountain of Tennessee.
Let freedom ring from every hill and molehill of Mississippi.
From every mountainside, let freedom ring.
And when this happens, when we allow freedom ring, when we let it ring from every village and every hamlet, from
every state and every city, we will be able to speed up that day when all of God's children, black men and white men,
Jews and Gentiles, Protestants and Catholics, will be able to join hands and sing in the words of the old Negro
spiritual: Free at last! Free at last! God Almighty, we are free at last!




I am forced to preach under something of a handicap this morning. In fact, I had the doctor before coming to church.
And he said that it would be best for me to stay in the bed this morning. And I insisted that I would have to come to
preach. So he allowed me to come out with one stipulation, and that is that I would not come in the pulpit until time to
preach, and that after, that I would immediately go back home and get in the bed. So I'm going to try to follow his
instructions from that point on.
I want to use as a subject from which to preach this morning a very familiar subject, and it is familiar to you because I
have preached from this subject twice before to my knowing in this pulpit. I try to make it a, something of a custom or
tradition to preach from this passage of Scripture at least once a year, adding new insights that I develop along the
way out of new experiences as I give these messages. Although the content is, the basic content is the same, new
insights and new experiences naturally make for new illustrations.
So I want to turn your attention to this subject: "Loving Your Enemies." It's so basic to me because it is a part of my
basic philosophical and theological orientation the whole idea of love, the whole philosophy of love. In the fifth
chapter of the gospel as recorded by Saint Matthew, we read these very arresting words flowing from the lips of our
Lord and Master: "Ye have heard that it has been said, "Thou shall love thy neighbor, and hate thine enemy." But I
say unto you, Love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them that
despitefully use you; that ye may be the children of your Father which is in heaven."
Certainly these are great words, words lifted to cosmic proportions. And over the centuries, many persons have
argued that this is an extremely difficult command. Many would go so far as to say that it just isn't possible to move
out into the actual practice of this glorious command. They would go on to say that this is just additional proof that
Jesus was an impractical idealist who never quite came down to earth. So the arguments abound. But far from being
an impractical idealist, Jesus has become the practical realist. The words of this text glitter in our eyes with a new
urgency. Far from being the pious injunction of a utopian dreamer, this command is an absolute necessity for the
survival of our civilization. Yes, it is love that will save our world and our civilization, love even for enemies.
Now let me hasten to say that Jesus was very serious when he gave this command; he wasn't playing. He realized
that it's hard to love your enemies. He realized that it's difficult to love those persons who seek to defeat you, those
persons who say evil things about you. He realized that it was painfully hard, pressingly hard. But he wasn't playing.
And we cannot dismiss this passage as just another example of Oriental hyperbole, just a sort of exaggeration to get
over the point. This is a basic philosophy of all that we hear coming from the lips of our Master. Because Jesus
wasn't playing; because he was serious. We have the Christian and moral responsibility to seek to discover the
meaning of these words, and to discover how we can live out this command, and why we should live by this
command.
Now first let us deal with this question, which is the practical question: How do you go about loving your enemies? I
think the first thing is this: In order to love your enemies, you must begin by analyzing self. And I'm sure that seems
strange to you, that I start out telling you this morning that you love your enemies by beginning with a look at self. It
seems to me that that is the first and foremost way to come to an adequate discovery to the how of this situation.
Now, I'm aware of the fact that some people will not like you, not because of something you have done to them, but
they just won't like you. I'm quite aware of that. Some people aren't going to like the way you walk; some people aren't going to like the way you talk. Some people aren't going to like you because you can do your job better than
they can do theirs. Some people aren't going to like you because other people like you, and because you're popular,
and because you're well-liked, they aren't going to like you. Some people aren't going to like you because your hair is
a little shorter than theirs or your hair is a little longer than theirs. Some people aren't going to like you because your
skin is a little brighter than theirs; and others aren't going to like you because your skin is a little darker than theirs.
So that some people aren't going to like you. They're going to dislike you, not because of something that you've done
to them, but because of various jealous reactions and other reactions that are so prevalent in human nature.
But after looking at these things and admitting these things, we must face the fact that an individual might dislike us
because of something that we've done deep down in the past, some personality attribute that we possess, something
that we've done deep down in the past and we've forgotten about it; but it was that something that aroused the hate
response within the individual. That is why I say, begin with yourself. There might be something within you that
arouses the tragic hate response in the other individual.
This is true in our international struggle. We look at the struggle, the ideological struggle between communism on the
one hand and democracy on the other, and we see the struggle between America and Russia. Now certainly, we can
never give our allegiance to the Russian way of life, to the communistic way of life, because communism is based on
an ethical relativism and a metaphysical materialism that no Christian can accept. When we look at the methods of
communism, a philosophy where somehow the end justifies the means, we cannot accept that because we believe
as Christians that the end is pre-existent in the means. But in spite of all of the weaknesses and evils inherent in
communism, we must at the same time see the weaknesses and evils within democracy.
Democracy is the greatest form of government to my mind that man has ever conceived, but the weakness is that we
have never touched it. Isn't it true that we have often taken necessities from the masses to give luxuries to the
classes? Isn't it true that we have often in our democracy trampled over individuals and races with the iron feet of
oppression? Isn't it true that through our Western powers we have perpetuated colonialism and imperialism? And all
of these things must be taken under consideration as we look at Russia. We must face the fact that the rhythmic beat
of the deep rumblings of discontent from Asia and Africa is at bottom a revolt against the imperialism and colonialism
perpetuated by Western civilization all these many years. The success of communism in the world today is due to the
failure of democracy to live up to the noble ideals and principles inherent in its system.
And this is what Jesus means when he said: "How is it that you can see the mote in your brother's eye and not see
the beam in your own eye?" Or to put it in Moffatt's translation: "How is it that you see the splinter in your brother's
eye and fail to see the plank in your own eye?" And this is one of the tragedies of human nature. So we begin to love
our enemies and love those persons that hate us whether in collective life or individual life by looking at ourselves.
A second thing that an individual must do in seeking to love his enemy is to discover the element of good in his
enemy, and everytime you begin to hate that person and think of hating that person, realize that there is some good
there and look at those good points which will over-balance the bad points.
I've said to you on many occasions that each of us is something of a schizophrenic personality. We're split up and
divided against ourselves. And there is something of a civil war going on within all of our lives. There is a recalcitrant
South of our soul revolting against the North of our soul. And there is this continual struggle within the very structure
of every individual life. There is something within all of us that causes us to cry out with Ovid, the Latin poet, "I see
and approve the better things of life, but the evil things I do." There is something within all of us that causes us to cry
out with Plato that the human personality is like a charioteer with two headstrong horses, each wanting to go in
different directions. There is something within each of us that causes us to cry out with Goethe, "There is enough
stuff in me to make both a gentleman and a rogue." There is something within each of us that causes us to cry out
with Apostle Paul, "I see and approve the better things of life, but the evil things I do." So somehow the "isness" of our present nature is out of harmony with the eternal "oughtness" that forever confronts
us. And this simply means this: That within the best of us, there is some evil, and within the worst of us, there is some
good. When we come to see this, we take a different attitude toward individuals. The person who hates you most has
some good in him; even the nation that hates you most has some good in it; even the race that hates you most has
some good in it. And when you come to the point that you look in the face of every man and see deep down within
him what religion calls "the image of God," you begin to love him in spite of. No matter what he does, you see God's
image there. There is an element of goodness that he can never sluff off. Discover the element of good in your
enemy. And as you seek to hate him, find the center of goodness and place your attention there and you will take a
new attitude.
Another way that you love your enemy is this: When the opportunity presents itself for you to defeat your enemy, that
is the time which you must not do it. There will come a time, in many instances, when the person who hates you
most, the person who has misused you most, the person who has gossiped about you most, the person who has
spread false rumors about you most, there will come a time when you will have an opportunity to defeat that person.
It might be in terms of a recommendation for a job; it might be in terms of helping that person to make some move in
life. That's the time you must do it. That is the meaning of love. In the final analysis, love is not this sentimental
something that we talk about. It's not merely an emotional something. Love is creative, understanding goodwill for all
men. It is the refusal to defeat any individual. When you rise to the level of love, of its great beauty and power, you
seek only to defeat evil systems. Individuals who happen to be caught up in that system, you love, but you seek to
defeat the system.
The Greek language, as I've said so often before, is very powerful at this point. It comes to our aid beautifully in
giving us the real meaning and depth of the whole philosophy of love. And I think it is quite apropos at this point, for
you see the Greek language has three words for love, interestingly enough. It talks about love as eros. That's one
word for love. Eros is a sort of, aesthetic love. Plato talks about it a great deal in his dialogues, a sort of yearning of
the soul for the realm of the gods. And it's come to us to be a sort of romantic love, though it's a beautiful love.
Everybody has experienced eros in all of its beauty when you find some individual that is attractive to you and that
you pour out all of your like and your love on that individual. That is eros, you see, and it's a powerful, beautiful love
that is given to us through all of the beauty of literature; we read about it.
Then the Greek language talks about philia, and that's another type of love that's also beautiful. It is a sort of
intimate affection between personal friends. And this is the type of love that you have for those persons that you're
friendly with, your intimate friends, or people that you call on the telephone and you go by to have dinner with, and
your roommate in college and that type of thing. It's a sort of reciprocal love. On this level, you like a person because
that person likes you. You love on this level, because you are loved. You love on this level, because there's
something about the person you love that is likeable to you. This too is a beautiful love. You can communicate with a
person; you have certain things in common; you like to do things together. This is philia.
The Greek language comes out with another word for love. It is the word agape. And agape is more than eros; agape
is more than philia; agape is something of the understanding, creative, redemptive goodwill for all men. It is a love
that seeks nothing in return. It is an overflowing love; it's what theologians would call the love of God working in the
lives of men. And when you rise to love on this level, you begin to love men, not because they are likeable, but
because God loves them. You look at every man, and you love him because you know God loves him. And he might
be the worst person you’ve ever seen.
And this is what Jesus means, I think, in this very passage when he says, "Love your enemy." And it's significant
that he does not say, "Like your enemy." Like is a sentimental something, an affectionate something. There are a lot
of people that I find it difficult to like. I don't like what they do to me. I don't like what they say about me and other
people. I don't like their attitudes. I don't like some of the things they're doing. I don't like them. But Jesus says
love them. And love is greater than like. Love is understanding, redemptive goodwill for all men, so that you love 
9
RICHTON PARK LIBRARY MLK PROGRAM: Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Speeches
everybody, because God loves them. You refuse to do anything that will defeat an individual, because you have
agape in your soul. And here you come to the point that you love the individual who does the evil deed, while hating
the deed that the person does. This is what Jesus means when he says, "Love your enemy." This is the way to do it.
When the opportunity presents itself when you can defeat your enemy, you must not do it.
Now for the few moments left, let us move from the practical how to the theoretical why. It's not only necessary to
know how to go about loving your enemies, but also to go down into the question of why we should love our enemies.
I think the first reason that we should love our enemies, and I think this was at the very center of Jesus' thinking, is
this: that hate for hate only intensifies the existence of hate and evil in the universe. If I hit you and you hit me and I
hit you back and you hit me back and go on, you see, that goes on ad infinitum. [tapping on pulpit] It just never ends.
Somewhere somebody must have a little sense, and that's the strong person. The strong person is the person who
can cut off the chain of hate, the chain of evil. And that is the tragedy of hate, that it doesn't cut it off. It only
intensifies the existence of hate and evil in the universe. Somebody must have religion enough and morality enough
to cut it off and inject within the very structure of the universe that strong and powerful element of love.
I think I mentioned before that sometime ago my brother and I were driving one evening to Chattanooga, Tennessee,
from Atlanta. He was driving the car. And for some reason the drivers were very discourteous that night. They didn't
dim their lights; hardly any driver that passed by dimmed his lights. And I remember very vividly, my brother A. D.
looked over and in a tone of anger said: "I know what I'm going to do. The next car that comes along here and
refuses to dim the lights, I'm going to fail to dim mine and pour them on in all of their power." And I looked at him
right quick and said: "Oh no, don't do that. There'd be too much light on this highway, and it will end up in mutual
destruction for all. Somebody got to have some sense on this highway."
Somebody must have sense enough to dim the lights, and that is the trouble, isn't it? That as all of the civilizations of
the world move up the highway of history, so many civilizations, having looked at other civilizations that refused to
dim the lights, and they decided to refuse to dim theirs. And Toynbee tells that out of the twenty-two civilizations that
have risen up, all but about seven have found themselves in the junkheap of destruction. It is because civilizations
fail to have sense enough to dim the lights. And if somebody doesn't have sense enough to turn on the dim and
beautiful and powerful lights of love in this world, the whole of our civilization will be plunged into the abyss of
destruction. And we will all end up destroyed because nobody had any sense on the highway of history. Somewhere
somebody must have some sense. Men must see that force begets force, hate begets hate, toughness begets
toughness. And it is all a descending spiral, ultimately ending in destruction for all and everybody. Somebody must
have sense enough and morality enough to cut off the chain of hate and the chain of evil in the universe. And you do
that by love.
There's another reason why you should love your enemies, and that is because hate distorts the personality of the
hater. We usually think of what hate does for the individual hated or the individuals hated or the groups hated. But it
is even more tragic, it is even more ruinous and injurious to the individual who hates. You just begin hating
somebody, and you will begin to do irrational things. You can't see straight when you hate. You can't walk straight
when you hate. You can't stand upright. Your vision is distorted. There is nothing more tragic than to see an
individual whose heart is filled with hate. He comes to the point that he becomes a pathological case. For the person
who hates, you can stand up and see a person and that person can be beautiful, and you will call them ugly. For the
person who hates, the beautiful becomes ugly and the ugly becomes beautiful. For the person who hates, the good
becomes bad and the bad becomes good. For the person who hates, the true becomes false and the false becomes
true. That's what hate does. You can't see right. The symbol of objectivity is lost. Hate destroys the very structure of
the personality of the hater. And this is why Jesus says hate [recording interrupted] . . . that you want to be integrated
with yourself, and the way to be integrated with yourself is be sure that you meet every situation of life with an
abounding love. Never hate, because it ends up in tragic, neurotic responses. Psychologists and psychiatrists are
telling us today that the more we hate, the more we develop guilt feelings and we begin to subconsciously repress or
consciously suppress certain emotions, and they all stack up in our subconscious selves and make for tragic, 
10 RICHTON PARK LIBRARY MLK PROGRAM: Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. Speeches
neurotic responses. And may this not be the neuroses of many individuals as they confront life that that is an element
of hate there. And modern psychology is calling on us now to love. But long before modern psychology came into
being, the world's greatest psychologist who walked around the hills of Galilee told us to love. He looked at men and
said: "Love your enemies; don't hate anybody." It's not enough for us to hate your friends because when you start hating anybody, it destroys the very center of your creative response to life and the
universe; so love everybody. Hate at any point is a cancer that gnaws away at the very vital center of your life and
your existence. It is like eroding acid that eats away the best and the objective center of your life. So Jesus says love,
because hate destroys the hater as well as the hated.
Now there is a final reason I think that Jesus says, "Love your enemies." It is this: that love has within it a redemptive
power. And there is a power there that eventually transforms individuals. That's why Jesus says, "Love your
enemies." Because if you hate your enemies, you have no way to redeem and to transform your enemies. But if you
love your enemies, you will discover that at the very root of love is the power of redemption. You just keep loving
people and keep loving them, even though they're mistreating you. Here's the person who is a neighbor, and this
person is doing something wrong to you and all of that. Just keep being friendly to that person. Keep loving them.
Don't do anything to embarrass them. Just keep loving them, and they can't stand it too long. Oh, they react in
many ways in the beginning. They react with bitterness because they're mad because you love them like that. They
react with guilt feelings, and sometimes they'll hate you a little more at that transition period, but just keep loving
them. And by the power of your love they will break down under the load. That's love, you see. It is redemptive, and
this is why Jesus says love. There's something about love that builds up and is creative. There is something about
hate that tears down and is destructive. So love your enemies.
I think of one of the best examples of this. We all remember the great president of this United States, Abraham
Lincoln, these United States rather. You remember when Abraham Lincoln was running for president of the United
States, there was a man who ran all around the country talking about Lincoln. He said a lot of bad things about
Lincoln, a lot of unkind things. And sometimes he would get to the point that he would even talk about his looks,
saying, "You don't want a tall, lanky, ignorant man like this as the president of the United States." He went on and on
and on and went around with that type of attitude and wrote about it. Finally, one day Abraham Lincoln was elected
president of the United States. And if you read the great biography of Lincoln, if you read the great works about him,
you will discover that as every president comes to the point, he came to the point of having to choose a Cabinet. And
then came the time for him to choose a Secretary of War. He looked across the nation, and decided to choose a man
by the name of Mr. Stanton. And when Abraham Lincoln stood around his advisors and mentioned this fact, they said
to him: "Mr. Lincoln, are you a fool? Do you know what Mr. Stanton has been saying about you? Do you know what
he has done, tried to do to you? Do you know that he has tried to defeat you on every hand? Do you know that, Mr.
Lincoln? Did you read all of those derogatory statements that he made about you?" Abraham Lincoln stood before
the advisors around him and said: "Oh yes, I know about it; I read about it; I've heard him myself. But after looking
over the country, I find that he is the best man for the job."
Mr. Stanton did become Secretary of War, and a few months later, Abraham Lincoln was assassinated. And if you go
to Washington, you will discover that one of the greatest words or statements ever made by, about Abraham Lincoln
was made about this man Stanton. And as Abraham Lincoln came to the end of his life, Stanton stood up and said:
"Now he belongs to the ages." And he made a beautiful statement concerning the character and the stature of this
man. If Abraham Lincoln had hated Stanton, if Abraham Lincoln had answered everything Stanton said, Abraham
Lincoln would have not transformed and redeemed Stanton. Stanton would have gone to his grave hating Lincoln,
and Lincoln would have gone to his grave hating Stanton. But through the power of love Abraham Lincoln was able to
redeem Stanton.
That's it. There is a power in love that our world has not discovered yet. Jesus discovered it centuries ago. Mahatma
Gandhi of India discovered it a few years ago, but most men and most women never discover it. For they believe in hitting for hitting; they believe in an eye for an eye and a tooth for a tooth; they believe in hating for hating; but Jesus
comes to us and says, "This isn't the way."
And oh this morning, as I think of the fact that our world is in transition now. Our whole world is facing a revolution.
Our nation is facing a revolution, our nation. One of the things that concerns me most is that in the midst of the
revolution of the world and the midst of the revolution of this nation, that we will discover the meaning of Jesus'
words.
History unfortunately leaves some people oppressed and some people oppressors. And there are three ways that
individuals who are oppressed can deal with their oppression. One of them is to rise up against their oppressors with
physical violence and corroding hatred. But oh this isn't the way. For the danger and the weakness of this method is
its futility. Violence creates many more social problems than it solves. And I've said, in so many instances, that as
the Negro, in particular, and colored peoples all over the world struggle for freedom, if they succumb to the
temptation of using violence in their struggle, unborn generations will be the recipients of a long and desolate night of
bitterness, and our chief legacy to the future will be an endless reign of meaningless chaos. Violence isnt the way.
Another way is to acquiesce and to give in, to resign yourself to the oppression. Some people do that. They discover
the difficulties of the wilderness moving into the promised land, and they would rather go back to the despots of
Egypt because its difficult to get in the promised land. And so they resign themselves to the fate of oppression; they
somehow acquiesce to this thing. But that too isnt the way because non-cooperation with evil is as much a moral
obligation as is cooperation with good.
But there is another way. And that is to organize mass non-violent resistance based on the principle of love. It seems
to me that this is the only way as our eyes look to the future. As we look out across the years and across the
generations, let us develop and move right here. We must discover the power of love, the power, the redemptive
power of love. And when we discover that we will be able to make of this old world a new world. We will be able to
make men better. Love is the only way. Jesus discovered that.
Not only did Jesus discover it, even great military leaders discover that. One day as Napoleon came toward the end
of his career and looked back across the years the great Napoleon that at a very early age had all but conquered the
world. He was not stopped until he became, till he moved out to the battle of Leipzig and then to Waterloo. But that
same Napoleon one day stood back and looked across the years, and said: "Alexander, Caesar, Charlemagne, and I
have built great empires. But upon what did they depend? They depended upon force. But long ago Jesus started an
empire that depended on love, and even to this day millions will die for him."
Yes, I can see Jesus walking around the hills and the valleys of Palestine. And I can see him looking out at the
Roman Empire with all of her fascinating and intricate military machinery. But in the midst of that, I can hear him
saying: "I will not use this method. Neither will I hate the Roman Empire." [Radio Announcer:] (WRMA, Montgomery,
Alabama. Due to the fact of the delay this morning, we are going over with the sermon.) [several words inaudible] . . .
and just start marching.
And Im proud to stand here in Dexter this morning and say that that army is still marching. It grew up from a group
of eleven or twelve men to more than seven hundred million today. Because of the power and influence of the
personality of this Christ, he was able to split history into a.d. and b.c. Because of his power, he was able to shake
the hinges from the gates of the Roman Empire. And all around the world this morning, we can hear the glad echo of
heaven ring:
Jesus shall reign wherever sun,
Does his successive journeys run;
His kingdom spreads from shore to shore,
Till moon shall wane and wax no more.
We can hear another chorus singing: "All hail the power of Jesus name!"
We can hear another chorus singing: "Hallelujah, hallelujah! Hes King of Kings and Lord of
Lords. Hallelujah, hallelujah!"
We can hear another choir singing:
In Christ there is no East or West.
In Him no North or South,
But one great Fellowship of Love
Throughout the whole wide world.
This is the only way.
And our civilization must discover that. Individuals must discover that as they deal with other individuals. There is a
little tree planted on a little hill and on that tree hangs the most influential character that ever came in this world. But
never feel that that tree is a meaningless drama that took place on the stages of history. Oh no, it is a telescope
through which we look out into the long vista of eternity, and see the love of God breaking forth into time. It is an
eternal reminder to a power-drunk generation that love is the only way. It is an eternal reminder to a generation
depending on nuclear and atomic energy, a generation depending on physical violence, that love is the only creative,
redemptive, transforming power in the universe.
So this morning, as I look into your eyes, and into the eyes of all of my brothers in Alabama and all over America and
over the world, I say to you, "I love you. I would rather die than hate you." And I'm foolish enough to believe that
through the power of this love somewhere, men of the most recalcitrant bent will be transformed. And then we will be
in God's kingdom. We will be able to matriculate into the university of eternal life because we had the power to love
our enemies, to bless those persons that cursed us, to even decide to be good to those persons who hated us, and
we even prayed for those persons who despitefully used us.
Oh God, help us in our lives and in all of our attitudes, to work out this controlling force of love, this controlling power
that can solve every problem that we confront in all areas. Oh, we talk about politics; we talk about the problems
facing our atomic civilization. Grant that all men will come together and discover that as we solve the crisis and solve
these problems "the international problems, the problems of atomic energy, the problems of nuclear energy, and yes,
even the race problem" let us join together in a great fellowship of love and bow down at the feet of Jesus. Give us
this strong determination. In the name and spirit of this Christ, we pray. Amen.




